XII. BRUTE NEIGHBOURS.
Sometimes I had a companion in my fishing, who came through the village to my house
from the other side of town, and the catching of the dinner was as much a social exercise
as the eating of it—Hermit. I wonder what the world is doing now. I have not heard so
much as a locust over the sweet fern these three hours. The pigeons are all asleep upon
their roosts. No flutter from them. Was that a farmer's noon horn which sounded from beyond
the woods just now? The hands are coming in to boiled salt beef and cider and Indian bread.
Why will men worry themselves so? He that does not eat need not work. I wonder how much
they have reaped. Who would live there where a body can never think for the barking of
boasts? And, oh, the housekeeping! To keep bright the devil's doorknobs and scour his
tubs this bright day, better not keep a house. Say, some hollow tree, and then for morning
dinner parties. Only a woodpecker tapping. Oh, they swarm. The sun is too warm there.
They are born too far into life for me. I have water from the spring and a loaf of brown
bread on the shelf. Hark! I hear a rustling of the leaves. Is it some ill-fed village
hound yielding to the instinct of the chase, or the lost pig which is said to be in these
woods, whose tracks I saw after the rain? It comes on apace. My sumacs and sweetbriars
tremble.
Eh? Mr. Poet, is it you? How do you like the world today?
Poet, see those clouds, how they hang. That's the greatest thing I have seen today. There's
nothing like it in old paintings, nothing like it in foreign lands, unless when we were
off the coast of Spain. That's a true Mediterranean sky. I thought as I have my living to get,
and have not eaten today, that I might go a-fishing. That's the true industry for poets.
It is the only trade I have learned. Come, let's along.
Hermit, I cannot resist. My brown bread will soon be gone. I will go with you gladly soon.
But I am just concluding a serious meditation. I think that I am near the end of it.
Leave me alone, then, for a while. But that we may not be delayed, you shall be digging
the bait, meanwhile. Angle-worms are rarely to be met with in these parts where the soil
was never fattened with manure. The race is nearly extinct. The sport of digging the bait
is nearly equal to that of catching the fish, when one's appetite is not too keen, and this
you may have all to yourself today. I would advise you to set in the spade down yonder
among the ground-nuts, where you see the John's-wort waving. I think that I may warrant you one
worm to every three sods you turn up, if you look well in among the roots of the grass,
as if you were weaving, or if you choose to go farther it will not be unwise. For I have
found the increase of fair bait to be very nearly as the squares of the distances.
Hermit alone. Let me see, where was I? Methinks I was nearly in this frame of mind. The world
lay about at this angle. Shall I go to heaven, or a fishing? If I should soon bring this
meditation to an end, would another so sweet occasion be likely to offer? I was as near
being resolved into the essence of things as ever I was in my life. I fear my thoughts
will not come back to me. If it would do any good I would whistle for them. When they make
us an offer, is it wise to say we will think of it? My thoughts have left no track, and
I cannot find the path again. What was it that I was thinking of? And was a very hazy
day. I will just try these three sentences of confuzzi. They may fetch that state about
again. I know not whether it was the dumps or a budding ecstasy. Mem, there never is
but one opportunity of a kind. Poet. How now, Hermit? Is it too soon? I have got just thirteen
whole ones, besides several which are imperfect or undersized, but they will do for the smaller
fry. They do not cover up the hook so much. Those village worms are quite too large. A
Well then, let's be off, shall we, to Concord? There's good sport there if the water be not
too high. Why do precisely these objects which we behold make a world? Why has man just these
species of animals for his neighbors as if nothing but a mouse could have filled this
I suspect that Pilpe and company have put animals to their best use, for they are all
beasts of burden, in a sense, made to carry some portion of our thoughts. The mice which
haunted my house were not the common ones, which are said to have been introduced into
the country, but a wild native kind not found in the village. I sent one to a distinguished
naturalist and it interested him much. When I was building one of these had its nest underneath
the house, and before I had laid the second floor and swept out the shavings would come
out regularly at lunchtime and pick up the crumbs at my feet. It probably had never seen
a man before, and it soon became quite familiar and would run over my shoes and up my clothes.
It could readily ascend the sides of the room by short impulses like a squirrel, which it
resembled in its motions. At length, as I leaned with my elbow on the bench one day,
it ran up my clothes and along my sleeve and round and round the paper which held my dinner,
while I kept the latter close and dodged and played at Bo Peep with it, and when at last
I held still a piece of cheese between my thumb and finger, it came and nibbled it sitting
in my hand, and afterward cleaned its face and paws like a fly and walked away. A Phoebe
soon built in my shed, and a robin for protection in a pine which grew against the house. In
June the partridge Tetrao Ombellus, which is so shy a bird, led her brood past my windows,
from the woods in the rear to the front of my house, plucking and calling to them like
a hen, and in all her behavior proving herself the hen of the woods. The young suddenly disperse
on your approach at a signal from the mother, as if a whirlwind had swept them away, and
they so exactly resemble the dried leaves and twigs that many a traveler has placed
his foot in the midst of a brood, and heard the whirr of the old bird as she flew off,
and her anxious calls and mewing, or seen her trail her wings to attract his attention,
without suspecting their neighborhood. The parent will sometimes roll and spin round
before you in such a dishabil that you cannot for a few moments detect what kind of creature
it is. The young squat still and flat, often running their heads under a leaf, and mind
only their mother's directions given from a distance, nor will your approach make them
run again and betray themselves. You may even tread on them, or have your eyes on them for
a minute without discovering them. I have held them in my open hand at such a time,
and still their only care, obedient to their mother and their instinct, was to squat there
fear or trembling. So perfect is this instinct that once when I had lain them on the leaves
again and one accidentally fell on its side, it was found with the rest in exactly the
same position ten minutes afterward. They are not callow like the young of most birds,
but more perfectly developed and precocious even than chickens. The remarkably adult yet
innocent expression of their open and serene eyes is very memorable. All intelligence seems
reflected in them. They suggest not merely the purity of infancy, but a wisdom clarified
by experience. Such an eye was not born when the bird was, but is co-evil with the sky
it reflects. The woods do not yield another such a gem. The traveller does not often look
into such a limpid well. The ignorant or reckless sportsman often shoots the parent at such
time, and leaves these innocents to fall a prey to some prowling beast or bird, or gradually
mingle with the decaying leaves which they so much resemble. It is said that when hatched
by a hen they will directly disperse on some alarm, and so are lost, for they never hear
the mother's call which gathers them again. These were my hens and chickens. It is remarkable
how many creatures live wild and free, though secret in the woods, and still sustain themselves
in the neighbourhood of towns, suspected by hunters only. How retired the otter manages
to live here. He grows to be four feet long, as big as a small boy, perhaps without any
human being getting a glimpse of him. I formerly saw the raccoon in the woods, behind where
my house is built, and probably still heard their winnowing at night. Commonly I rested
an hour or two in the shade at noon, after planting, and ate my lunch and read a little
by a spring which was the source of a swamp and of a brook, oozing from under Brister's
Hill, half a mile from my field. The approach to this was through a succession of descending
grassy hollows, full of young pitch pines into a larger wood about the swamp. There
in a very secluded and shaded spot, under a spreading white pine, there was yet a clean
firm sward to sit on. I had dug out the spring and made a well of clear grey water, where
I could dip up a pailful without roiling it. And thither I went for this purpose almost
every day in midsummer, when the pond was warmest. Thither, too, the woodcock led her
brood to probe the mud for worms, flying but a foot above them down the bank while they
ran in a troop beneath. But at last spying me, she would leave her young and circle round
and round me, nearer and nearer till within four or five feet, pretending broken wings
and legs to attract my attention, and get off her young, who would already have taken
up their march with faint, wiry peep, single file through the swamp as she directed. Or
I heard the peep of the young when I could not see the parent bird. There, too, the turtle-doves
sat over the spring, or fluttered from bough to bough of the soft white pines over my head,
or the red squirrel, coursing down the nearest bough, was particularly familiar and inquisitive.
You only need sit still long enough in some attractive spot in the woods, that all its
inhabitants may exhibit themselves to you by turns.
I was witness to events of a less peaceful character. One day when I went out to my wood-pile,
or rather my pile of stumps, I observed two large ants, the one red, the other much larger
nearly half an inch long and black, fiercely contending with one another. Having once got
cold, they never let go, but struggled and wrestled and rolled on the chips incessantly.
Looking farther I was surprised to find that the chips were covered with such combatants,
that it was not a doolum, but a bellum, a war between two races of ants, the red always
pitted against the black, and frequently two red ones to one black. The legions of these
Mermidons covered all the hills and vales in my wood-yard, and the ground was already
strewn with the dead and dying, both red and black. It was the only battle which I have
ever witnessed, the only battlefield I ever trod while the battle was raging, internecine
war, the red republicans on the one hand and the black imperialists on the other. On every
side they were engaged in deadly combat, yet without any noise that I could hear, and human
soldiers never fought so resolutely. I watched a couple that were fast locked in each other's
embraces, in a little sunny valley amid the chips, now at noonday prepared to fight till
the sun went down or life went out. The smaller red champion had fastened himself like a vice
to his adversary's front, and through all the tumbling on that field never for an instant
ceased to gnaw at one of his feelers near the root, having already caused the other
to go by the board, while the stronger black one dashed him from side to side, and, as
I saw on looking nearer, had already divested him of several of his members. They fought
with more pertinacity than bulldogs, neither manifested the least disposition to retreat.
It was evident that their battle cry was conquer or die. In the meanwhile there came along
a single red ant on the hillside of this valley, evidently full of excitement, who either had
dispatched his foe or had not yet taken part in the battle, probably the latter, for he
had lost none of his limbs, whose mother had charged him to return with his shield or upon
it. Or, perchance, he was some Achilles, who had nourished his wrath apart, and had now
come to avenge or rescue his Patroclus. He saw this unequal combat from afar, and he
knew that he was not alone, for the blacks were nearly twice the size of the red. He
drew near with rapid pace, till he stood on his guard within half an inch of the combatants.
Then watching his opportunity he sprang upon the black warrior, and commenced his operations
near the root of his right foreleg, leaving the foe to select among his own members. And
so there were three united for life, as if a new kind of attraction had been invented
which put all other locks and cements to shame. I should not have wondered why this time to
find that they had their respective musical bands stationed on some eminent chip, and
playing their national heirs the while, to excite the slow and cheer the dying combatants.
I was myself excited, and somewhat even as if they had been men. The more you think of
it, the less the difference. And certainly there is not the fight recorded in Concord
history, at least, if in the history of America they will bear a moment's comparison with
this, whether for the numbers engaged in it, or for the patriotism and heroism displayed.
For numbers and for carnage it was an Austerlitz, or Dresden, Concord fight. Two killed on the
patriot side, and Luther Blanchard wounded. Why, here every ant was a buttrick. Fire!
For God's sake, fire! And thousands shared the fate of Davis and Hosmer. There was not
one hireling there. I have no doubt that it was a principle they fought for, as much as
our ancestors, and not to avoid a three-penny tax on their tea. And the results of this
battle of Bunker Hill, at least.
I took up the chip, on which the three I have particularly described were struggling, carried
it into my house, and placed it under a tumbler on my windowsill in order to see the issue.
Holding a microscope to the first mentioned red ant, I saw that though he was assiduously
gnawing at the near foreleg of his enemy, having severed his remaining feeler, his own
breast was all torn away, exposing what vitals he had there to the jaws of the black warrior,
whose breastplate was apparently too thick for him to pierce, and the dark carbuncles
of the sufferer's eyes shone with ferocity such as war only could excite. They struggled
half an hour longer under the tumbler, and when I looked again the black soldier had
severed the heads of his foes from their bodies, and the still-living heads were hanging on
either side of him like ghastly trophies at his saddle-bow, still apparently as firmly
fastened as ever, and he was endeavoring with feeble struggles, being without feelers and
with only the remnant of a leg, and I know not how many other wounds, to divest himself
of them, which at length, after half an hour more, he accomplished.
I raised the glass and he went off over the windowsill in that crippled state. Whether
he finally survived that combat and spent the remainder of his days in some Hôtel des
Invalides, I do not know, but I thought that his industry would not be worth much thereafter.
I never learned which party was victorious, nor the cause of the war, but I felt for the
rest of that day as if I had had my feelings excited and harrowed by witnessing the struggle,
the ferocity and carnage of a human battle before my door.
Kirby and Spence tell us that the battles of ants have long been celebrated and the
date of them recorded, though they say that Huber is the only modern author who appears
to have witnessed them. Agnus Silvius, say they, after giving a very circumstantial account
of one contested with great obstinacy by a great and small species on the trunk of a
pear tree, adds that this action was fought in the pontificate of Eugenius IV in the presence
of Nicholas Pistorianus, an eminent lawyer who related the whole history of the battle
with the greatest fidelity. A similar engagement between great and small ants is recorded by
Olaus Magnus, in which the small ones, being victorious, are said to have buried the bodies
of their own soldiers, but left those of their giant enemies a prey to the birds. This event
happened previous to the expulsion of the tyrant Christian II from Sweden. The battle
which I witnessed took place in the presidency of Polk, five years before the passage of
Pistor's fugitive slave Bill.
Many a village boas fit only to course a mud-turtle in a victuling cellar, sported his heavy quarters
in the woods, without the knowledge of his master, and ineffectually smelled at old fox
burrows and wood-chucks' holes, led perchance by some slight kerr which nimbly threaded
the wood, and might still inspire a natural terror in its denizens. Now far behind his
guide, barking like a canine bull towards some small squirrel, which had treated itself
for scrutiny, then cantering off, bending the bushes with his weight, imagining that
he is on the track of some stray member of the Gerbilla family. Once I was surprised
to see a cat walking along the stony shore of the pond, for they rarely wander so far
from the home. The surprise was mutual. Nevertheless, the most domestic cat which is laying on a
rug all her days appears quite at home in the woods, and, by her sly and stealthy behaviour,
proves herself more native there than the regular inhabitants.
Once when burying I met with a cat with young kittens in the woods, quite wild, and they
all, like their mother, had their backs up and were fiercely spitting at me. A few years
before I lived in the woods there was what was called a winged cat, and one of the farmhouses
in Lincoln nearest the pond, Mr. Gillian Bakers. When I called to see her in June, 1842, she
was gone a-hunting in the woods, as was her want. I am not sure whether it was a male
or female, and so use the more common pronoun. But her mistress told me that she came into
the neighborhood a little more than a year before, in April, and was finally taken into
their house, that she was of a dark brownish-grey color, with a white spot on her throat and
white feet, and had a large bushy tail like a fox, that in the winter the fur grew thick
and flatted out along her sides, forming stripes ten or twelve inches long by two and a half
wide, and under her chin like a muff. The upper side, loose, the under matted like felt,
and in the spring these appendages dropped off. They gave me a pair of her wings, which
I keep still. There is no appearance of a membrane about them. Some thought it was part
flying squirrel or some other wild animal, which is not impossible, for according to
naturalists prolific hybrids have been produced by the union of the marten and domestic cat.
This would have been the right kind of cat for me to keep, if I had kept any, for why
should not a poet's cat be winged as well as his horse?
In the fall the loon, Columbus Glacialis, came, as usual, to molt and bathe in the pond,
making the woods ring with his wild laughter before I had risen. At rumor of his arrival
all the mill-dam sportsmen are on the alert, in gigs and on foot, two by two and three
by three, with patent rifles and conical balls and spy-glasses. They come rustling through
the woods like autumn leaves, at least ten men to one loon. Some station themselves on
this side of the pond, some on that, for the poor bird cannot be omnipresent. If he
dive here he must come up there. But now the kind October wind rises, rustling
the leaves and rippling the surface of the water, so that no loon can be heard or seen,
though his foes sweep the pond with spy-glasses and make the woods resound with their discharges.
The waves generously rise and dash angrily, taking sides with all waterfowl, and our sportsmen
must beat a retreat to town and shop and unfinished jobs. But they were too often successful.
When I went to get a pail of water early in the morning I frequently saw this stately
bird sailing out of my cove within a few rods. If I endeavored to overtake him in a boat
in order to see how he would maneuver he would dive and be completely lost, so that I did
not discover him again, sometimes till the latter part of the day. But I was more than
a match for him on the surface. He commonly went off in a rain. As I was paddling along
the north shore one very calm October afternoon, for such days especially they settle on to
the lakes, like the milkweed down, having looked in vain over the pond for a loon, suddenly
one, sailing out from the shore toward the middle a few rods in front of me, set up his
wild laugh and betrayed himself. I pursued with a paddle and he dived, but when he came
up I was nearer than before. He dived again, but I miscalculated the direction he would
take, and we were fifty rods apart when he came to the surface this time, for I had helped
to widen the interval, and again he laughed long and loud, and with more reason than before.
He maneuvered so cunningly that I could not get within half a dozen rods of him. Each
time when he came to the surface, turning his head this way and that, he coolly surveyed
the water and the land, and apparently chose his course so that he might come up where
there was the widest expanse of water and at the greatest distance from the boat. It
was surprising how quickly he made up his mind and put his resolve into execution. He
led me at once to the widest part of the pond and could not be driven from it. While he
was thinking one thing in his brain I was endeavoring to divine his thought in mine.
It was a pretty game, played on the smooth surface of the pond, a man against a loon.
Suddenly, your adversary's checker disappears beneath the board, and the problem is to place
yours nearest to where his will appear again. Sometimes he would come up unexpectedly on
the opposite side of me, having apparently passed directly under the boat. So long-winded
was he, and so unwearable, that when he had swum farthest he would immediately plunge
again, nevertheless, and then no wit could divine where in the deep pond, beneath the
smooth surface, he might be speeding his way like a fish, for he had time and ability to
visit the bottom of the pond in its deepest part. It is said that loons have been caught
in the New York lakes, eighty feet beneath the surface, with hooks set for trout. Though
Walden is deeper than that. How surprised must the fishes be to see this ungainly visitor
from another sphere speeding his way amid their schools! Yet he appeared to know his
course as surely underwater as on the surface, and swam much faster there. Once or twice
I saw a ripple where he approached the surface, just put his head out to reconnoiter, and
instantly dived again. I found that it was as well for me to rest on my oars and wait
his reappearing as to endeavor to calculate where he would rise, for again and again when
I was straining my eyes over the surface one way I would suddenly be startled by his unearthly
laugh behind me. But why, after displaying so much cunning, did he invariably betray himself
the moment he came up by that loud laugh? Did not his white breast enough betray him?
He was indeed a silly loon, I thought. I could commonly hear the splash of the water
when he came up, and so also detected him. But after an hour he seemed as fresh as ever,
dived as willingly, and swam yet farther than at first. It was surprising to see how surreal
he sailed off with unruffled breast when he came to the surface, doing all the work with
his webbed feet beneath. His usual note was this demoniac laughter, yet somewhat like
that of a waterfowl. But occasionally when he had balked me most successfully, and come
up a long way off, he uttered a long-drawn, unearthly howl, probably more like that of
a wolf than any bird, as when a beast puts his muzzle to the ground and deliberately
howls. This was his looning, perhaps the wildest sound that is ever heard here, making the
woods ring far and wide. I concluded that he laughed in derision of my efforts, confident
of his own resources. Though the sky was by this time overcast, the pond was so smooth
that I could see where he broke the surface when I did not hear him. His white breast,
the stillness of the air, and the smoothness of the water were all against him. At length
having come up fifty rods off, he uttered one of those prolonged howls, as if calling
on the god of loons to aid him. And immediately there came a wind from the east, and rippled
the surface, and filled the whole air with misty rain, and I was impressed as if it were
the prayer of the loon answered, and his god was angry with me. And so I left him, disappearing
far away, on the tumultuous surface. For hours in fall days I watched the ducks
cunningly tack and veer and hold the middle of the pond, far from the sportsmen, tricks
which they will have less need to practice in Louisiana bayous. When compelled to rise
they would sometimes circle round and round and over the pond at a considerable height,
from which they could easily see to other ponds in the river, like black motes in the
sky. And when I thought they had gone off thither long since, they would settle down
by a slanting flight of a quarter of a mile on to a distant part which was left free.
But what, beside safety, they got by sailing in the middle of Walden, I do not know, unless
they love its water for the same reason that I do.